Artificial Bee Colony contains three types of colony:
1. Employee Bees
2. Onlookers
3. Scouts
The main steps of algorithm are:
1. Initial food sources are produced for employee bees
2. Repeat
(a) Each employee bee goes to a food source in her memory and determines a closest
source, then evaluates its nectar amount and dance in hive.
(b) Each onlooker watches the dances of employee bee and choose one of their source
depending on dance, and then goes to that source. After choosing a neighbor around
that, she evaluates its nectar amount.
(c) Abandoned food sources are determined and are replaced with new food source discovered
by scouts.[8]
(d) The best food source found so far is registered.
3. UNTIL (requirements are met)
5.3.1 Mathematical Expression
Number of employee bees = Number of onlookers = Number of solution in swarm
Step 1: Artificial Bee Colony generates a randomly distributed initial population of solution
(SN), where SN denotes the size of employee bee or onlookers.
Each solution xi is a D-dimensional vector where i= 1,2,3,...SN and D is number of optimisation
parameters.
Step 2: Then the initial fitness of population is evaluated( In ABC, the nectar amount of a
food source correspond to quality(fitness) of associated solution). The population of
solution is then subjected to repeated cycles such as employee bees, onlookers and scouts.
Step 3: For each employee bee, a new solution(Vij) is produced by using solution search equation:
Vij = xij + ij(xij-xkj)
where k is 1,2,....SN and j is 1,2....D are randomly generated indexes,
 is a random number between [-1,1] and
xij is food position or solution.
Step 4: Calculate the probability Pij for solution Vij by following equation:
Pi = fit P i SN
j=1 fitj
where fiti denotes fitness value of ith solution.
For each new solution, its fitness is evaluated and then it applies greedy mechanism that is
fitness value of new one is better than the previous, then employee bee would memorize
the new position and forgets previous one.
7
Step 5: If a position cannot be improved further through a predetermined cycles,the food source
should be abandoned.
Step 6: Memorize the best solution that is obtained.
Step 7: Repeat the cycles until termination condition is satisfied.[9]
